Chapter 1: The River Bank

The Mole had been working very hard all the morning, spring-cleaning his little home. First with brooms, then with dusters; then on ladders and steps and chairs, with a brush and a pail of whitewash; till he had dust in his throat and eyes, and splashes of whitewash all over his black fur, and an ached back and weary arms. 

Spring was moving in the air above and in the earth below and around him, penetrating even his dark and lowly little house with its spirit of divine discontent and longing. It was small wonder, then, that he suddenly flung down his brush on the floor, said 'Bother!' and 'O blow!' and also 'Hang spring-cleaning!' and bolted out of the house without even waiting to put on his coat.

He scraped and scratched and scrabbled and scrooged, and then he scrooged again and scrabbled and scratched and scraped, working busily with his little paws and muttering to himself, 'Up we go! Up we go!' till at last, pop! his snout came out into the sunlight, and he found himself rolling in the warm grass of a great meadow.

It all seemed too good to be true. As he sat on the grass and looked across the river, a dark hole in the bank opposite, just above the water's edge, caught his eye. Something bright and small seemed to twinkle down in the heart of it, vanished, and then twinkled once more like a tiny star. But it could hardly be a star in such an unlikely position; and it was too glittering and small for a glow-worm. 

Then, as he looked, it winked at him, and so declared itself to be an eye; and a small brown face began to grow up round it, with whiskers. A grave round face, with the same twinkle in its eye that had first attracted his notice. Small neat ears and thick silky hair. It was the Water Rat!

'Hullo, Mole!' said the Water Rat.
'Hullo, Rat!' said the Mole.
'Would you like to come over?' inquired the Rat presently.
'Oh, it's all very well to talk,' said the Mole, rather petulantly, he being new to a river and riverside life and its ways.

The Rat leaned down and unfastened a rope, and hauled on it; then he stepped lightly down into a little boat which the Mole had not observed. It was painted blue outside and white inside, and was just the size for two animals; and the Mole's whole heart went out to it at once.

The Rat sculled smartly across and tied up the boat, then held out his forepaw to the Mole as he stepped timidly down into it. 'Lean forward,' he said, 'and now shove off! We shall spend the whole day on the river!'
